Added how-to-became oss maintainer blog post. (#9)
bwplotka/my: web/content/posts/how-to-became-oss-maintainer.md

All of those I learned by practice while maintaining [Thanos](https://thanos.io), [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and other projects.
However mainly I found those by *observing* amazing examples of good maintainer behaviour, as well as seeing anti-patterns.
I am personally far from being perfect, but I try to follow those good patterns and improve everyday.

Last but not the least the following practices are purely soft skills related. I won't touch in this post how you should design your system, 
or write your code. Also let's assume you use GitHub Issues for bugs/feature requests and PRs for proposing changes.

## Be polite and friendly

I hope I don't need to say this, but no one will ever consider you as a good maintainer if you are not inclusive, approachable and polite.
No one says you have to be everywhere, talk to all users, always smile, and like everyone. No. But you have to be professional.
Either respond politely or don't respond at all. Never go into meaningless argues especially on Twitter (: Report sketchy interactions,
escalate but never fight back with trolls or aggressive people. 

> Also don't sell you open source project too pushy or in spammy way. It's easy to say "product X is shit, and our software is better".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also don't try to sell your open source project too hard, don't be too pushy or in spammy way. It's easy to say "product X is shit, and our software is better".
```

> But in this way you are in some way offending others while maybe they just have different trade-offs, different use cases etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in this way you are in some way offending others while they might just have different trade-offs, or different use cases etc.
```

> If you think your software is better, then keep doing good work, and see how users will adapt and like your product. They will do that when they see factual benefits, not just dry words.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you think your software is better, then keep up the good work, and see how users will adapt and like your product. They will do that when they see factual benefits, not just dry words.
```

Never swear. Be tolerant. Use "her" instead of "his" more often. Avoid offensive jokes. Accept that contributors makes mistakes,

> sometimes are frustrated ("Merge it please how difficult is?? it's one click of the button for you!!!!"). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sometimes they get frustrated ("Merge it please how difficult is?? it's one click of the button for you!!!!"). 
```

Users sometimes don't understand your project. Some of them don't see complexities and they miss what maintenance burden means.
However some contributors actually give amazing ideas and golden improvements so that's a trade-off of having the project in open source. (:

Try to be nice if you are suggesting changes on a PR. Try to explain reasoning, especially if someone is new to the community.

For example instead of saying: 
 
```
"Lol, that's wrong, it should be `NiceName()` not `ThatWrongName()`"
```

Maybe you could say:

```
"This is great overall, thanks! But I think we can still improve name of this method. The reason is that [consistency, more verbose, less complex, style guide linked here, etc]"
```

Important: Never ever compromise quality of the project just to be `friendly`! But be nice where you can e.g in communication in issues, PRs, slack or Twitter.

> This also includes private communication, because nothing leaves internat these days. (: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also includes private communication, because nothing leaves the internet these days. (: 
```

## Improve your English

> This is must have. Language details matters. Making basic grammar mistakes is not just ugly, they can seriously obfuscate the communication. It makes the person you wrote to (in e.g issue):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is must-have. Language details matters. Making basic grammar mistakes is not just ugly, they can seriously obfuscate the communication. It makes the person you write to (in e.g issue):
```

> * In the best case: Waste their time trying to understand exactly what you meant, asking following up questions etc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In the best case: Waste their time trying to understand exactly what you mean, asking following up questions etc
```

* Worse: They will just ignore your message, not respond at all.
* The worst: They will do totally opposite action to what you just recommend, waste time even more and get frustrated.

> This is really important: As a maintainer you need to save time. So, it's quite funny but to overall save time you have to sometimes spend bit more time on your messaging:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is really important: As a maintainer, you need to save time. So, it's quite funny but to save time overall, you have to sometimes spend a bit more time on your messaging:
```

* Always write full sentences. 
* Avoid "this" "those" "that" words. 
* Always explain in as much details as you can. 
* Link to other communication as well.
* Install [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com/) web plugin.
* Look in Google translate if you are unsure about some wording.
* Avoid abbreviations and shortenings. For example this sentence makes sense but it's probably unreadable for most of you: `"FTW we should avoid CRD in PO if used on OCP as part of CS and GSoC"` (: 
* Avoid saying "never" or "always". See why here (:

All those relates to project public communication but also to documentation, flag descriptions, code comments etc.

> I agree that it is brutal and unfair, especially for non native speakers like me.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I agree that it is brutal and unfair, especially for non-native speakers like me.
```

However you have to learn some tiny details of English to be more effective as the maintainer or, more effective as a contributor who might be maintainer some day.

##  Review issues and code carefully; Be strict

> We are all busy. Sometimes I am so tired and when there is some common issue, and someone reports new one that looks similar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are all busy. There are times when I am so tired and someone reports an issue that looks similar to a certain common issue,
```

> my brain automatically assumes it's a duplicate. Only to then see that I did not read carefully, was mistaken and that the reason is different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
my brain automatically assumes it's a duplicate. Only then I see that I did not read it carefully, and I was mistaken and the real reason was different.
```

So yes: Don't rush out too much, and **read things carefully**.

With PR: As maintainers we need to be extra careful. Software these days is complex. Go language improves readability enormously
(I would say it's the most simple and readable programming language), but still some software I work on ([Thanos](https://thanos.io))
is a distributed system that involves concurrency, tricky optimizations like [mmaping](todo) and [bespoke binary formats](todo).

> This means that every details might matter. And yes, we guarded against mistakes with unit/integration/e2e tests, cross-building tests and static analysis on every commit,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that every detail might matter. And yes, we guarded against mistakes with unit/integration/e2e tests, cross-building tests and static analysis on every commit,
```

but the coverage is always to low and it's easy to miss stuff. And every mistake cost: sometimes just time, sometimes reputation, sometimes actual money when you have major incident (e.g data loss, unavailability)

I might be perfectionist, but IMO it's really bad if the maintainer approve the PR with very visible mistakes, showing clearly that she/he did not even scroll it until the end ): 
There might be different reasons. Maybe maintainer was too tired, maybe simply did not see that mistake. Maybe she/he wanted to be nice and not block a contributions?

> Maybe author did amazing PRs before so they trust the author, so "why would I need to review carefully?" There could be sometimes evemore selfish reasoning: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maybe the author did amazing PRs before so maintainer trust the author, so "why would I need to review carefully?" There could be sometimes even more selfish reasoning: 
```

> They yolo approved just to show they are active, even though they don't have time to maintain project full time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They [YOLO](todo) approved just to show they are active, even though they don't have time to maintain project full time. 
```

This is not only related to maintainers. As external contributor you can also review pull request!

> In fact e.g in our review process policy, a contributor code review (if done by contributor we trust it knows a codebase)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact e.g according to our review process policy, a contributor's code review (if done by the contributor whom we trust and she knows the codebase)
```

> can be enough to merge some less impactfull PRs. I think this is great because it allows contributor to do reviews in a safe environment,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be enough to merge some less impactful PRs. I think this is great because it allows a contributor to do reviews in a safe environment,
```

with other maintainers to guide them if some comment is not particularly correct. It's also a very good sign that contributor is ready to become maintainer!

So! For every PR, as the maintainer, please:

> * Never ever approve the PR if you are not really sure if it makes sense OR if you don't have time to review it properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Never ever approve the PR if you are not really sure if it makes sense OR if you don't have enough time to review it properly.
```

> It is totally fine to postptone review totally or review only part of it and say that you can't review all right now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is totally fine to postpone a review or review only part of it and say that you can't review all right now.
```

> That's critical and please take it seriously. Green is a green: PR is approved (green) if you would be ok to deploy this in production. This is at least what we follow in Thanos project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's really critical and please take it seriously. Green is a green: PR is approved (green) if you would be ok to deploy this to production. This is at least what we follow in Thanos project.
```

* Don't trust anyone. Everyone does mistakes. Some more often, some less but still. Ask questions, challenge the code.

> * Review your own code. Trust me this works! if you change mindset into reviewer one and try to look through your diff before others, you can save some time ((: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Review your own code. Trust me this works! If you change your mindset into reviewer's and try to look through your diff before others, you can save some time ((: 
```

* Follow the suggestions I had in previous sections: be friendly and use proper English.

> With all of this, let's not go to extreme. It's probably fine if some variable name is not perfect or if some comment is missing, but I think you get my point. (: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With all of these, let's not go to the extreme. It's probably fine if some variable name is not perfect or if some comment is missing, but I think you get my point. (: 
```

> They say there are two types of developers. Some are happy to merge buggy, YOLO code because you can always improve it later and you can move quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They say there are two types of developers. In one group, developers are happy to merge buggy, YOLO code because you can always improve it later and you can move quickly.
```

MVP is done immediately, demo works in no time. But then what? Who will refactor the code? Who will make it consistent? Who will "productionise" it? And when? Answer is: probably no one, never (:

> That's why I am in other groups of developers: Those who aim for quality vs short term velocity. Design first vs quick MVP. We do that while maintaining both Thanos and Prometheus projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's why I am in the other group of developers: Those who aim for quality vs short term velocity. Design first vs quick MVP. We do that while maintaining both Thanos and Prometheus projects.
```

> And I suggest that as a honest best practice for long term projects like that. (: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And I suggest that as an honest best practice for long term projects like that. (: 
```

your chances. Chances that someone will trust you to do solid project maintenance. Or let me put me it this way: 
*if you do the opposite, most likely, no one will want you as the maintainer.* (:

### I am far from being perfect, but I try to follow those rules. 

My first [open source contribution was 2015 to Apache Mesos](https://github.com/apache/mesos/commits?author=bwplotka).
Since then I fall in love in open source work and started to learn the things I am sharing in this post by *observing*
examples of good maintainers behaviour, as well as seeing some anti-patterns. 
On top of this I learned a lot by practice while co-maintaining [Thanos](https://thanos.io), [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and other projects.

**Don't get me wrong: I am personally far from being perfect, but I try to improve every day.** Last but not least the following practices are
purely related to **soft skills**. I won't touch in this post how you should design your system or write your code. **If you did not already notice,
probably most of your work as the maintainer will be communication with the people.**

## Be Polite and Friendly.

> I hope I don't need to say this, but no one will never consider you as a good maintainer if you are not: *inclusive, approachable and polite.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I hope I don't need to say this, but no one will ever consider you as a good maintainer if you are not: *inclusive, approachable and polite.*
```

Organizations like [Apache.org](https://www.apache.org/), [Linux Foundation](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/) and [Cloud NativeComputing Foundation (CNCF)](https://www.cncf.io/)
help to maintain independence in terms of decision making. They help with operational functions like SWAG, organizing conferences and meetups,
3rd party paid resources (e.g cloud resources for testing), security audits and more.

### Stay organized

One way to get more productive is to start from your own personal organization skills. For that I really recommend the book 
[Getting Things Done by David Allen (available in the audiobook read by the author)](https://www.audible.co.uk/pd/Getting-Things-Done-Audiobook/B01B6WT3JY).
 
Spoiler alert! Focus on clearing your mind. If you have quick <3min task, just do it. For longer one try to note what's the next step
and save it in some trusted place (Google Keep, notebook). Visit this place everyday morning. This will allow your mind to relax,
be innovative and focused on what is now!

## Stay Healthy; Have Fun!

This is the last one but also the most important rule you will read here. **Don't overwork.** If you are tired or maintaining

> does not make you happy anymore, then first try to est (no computer allowed!), then just quit and find another thing to focus on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
does not make you happy anymore, then first try to rest (no computer allowed!), then just quit and find another thing to focus on.
```

**Never swear.** Be tolerant. Use "her" instead of "his" more often. Avoid offensive jokes. Accept that everyone makes mistakes.

### Either respond politely or don't respond at all. 

Never go into meaningless argues especially on Twitter (: Report sketchy interactions,
escalate but never fight back with trolls or aggressive people. 

### Don't try to sell your open source project too hard, in a pushy way.
 
It's always easy to say `"This other product X is shit, and our software is better"`. However, in this way you are in some way offending
others while maybe they might just have different trade-offs or different use cases etc.
If you think your software is better, then keep up the good work, and see how users will adapt and enjoy using your product.
They will do that when they see factual benefits, not just dry words.

### Saying "No" without offending others.

This one of the most difficult skills you need to learn as a maintainer. Some feature was proposed, code was written and it
does not fit the project's goal and vision. Then the contributor gets frustrated: 

```
"Merge it please! How difficult is?? It's just one click of the button for you!!!!" 
```

> This happens a lot and you need to learn how to be patient. Always try to respond explaining why the decision is to reject.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This happens a lot and you need to learn how to be patient. Always try to respond by explaining why you have decided to reject.
```

Try to propose an alternative that will work for the users. Usually, there is some other project that helps, or tooling, or API 
that your contributor can integrate with your project instead! [See example "No" in Thanos project](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/2014#issuecomment-579824888)

> Users sometimes don't understand your project. Some of them don't see complexities and they miss what maintenance burden means.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users sometimes don't understand your project. Some of them don't see complexities. They miss what maintenance burden means.
```

> However, some contributors give amazing ideas and golden improvements so that's a trade-off of having the project in open source. (:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, some contributors give amazing ideas and golden improvements so that's a trade-off of having the project in out in open. (:
```

**Important: Never compromise the quality of the project just to be `friendly`!**

### Try to be nice if you are suggesting changes on a PR. 

This is maybe obvious, but when you review dozens PRs a day, you can lose patience. Still, always try to explain the reasoning, especially if someone is new to the community.

For example instead of saying: 

```
`"Lol, that's wrong, it should be ThisNiceName() not ThatWrongName()"
```

Maybe you could say:
 
```
"This is great overall, thanks! But I think we can still improve the name of this method.
The reason is that [consistency, more verbose, less complex, style guide linked here, etc]"
```

It's really worth it! Contributors will love to contribute because they are learning, and they feel more supported.

### Be proactive and clear.

You can't escape awkward situations. Sometimes you can have two contributors yelling each other in the PR in their
language that someone has the right to implement a certain feature. Another time you want to quickly fix the issue, while there is already
not perfect PR by some contributor, waiting for a rebase. Or maybe you have the contributor who tries to "triage" issues by just

> commenting on every issue `ping @bwplotka` several times (like I am not getting spam in inbox already...).

Reviewer: 😅

Try to consider other people's feelings. What helps in ALL those cases is to ask the contributor to join Slack

> and discuss the matter directly. in 99% the situation gets resolved because the person feels supported, she or he knows you care

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and discuss the matter directly. When you do this, in 99% of the situations, it gets resolved because you show that you care. The person feels supported,
```

> and you can fully explain why and what, etc. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and you find a chance to fully explain why and what, etc. 
```

Also, keep in mind that you can provide feedback to the person **directly** on the private channel.
Sometimes people just don't know they are rude or doing something wrong. It's ok to say the truth and be honest about the problem,
as long as it is delivered in a nice, positive way (!).

### Have fun!

Open Source is fun place. If you spent some of your work or free time at forums, GitHub Issues and working with the community, it's
always worth to fill this place with positive energy! Laugh, jokes, funny situations, memes, emojis. Everything is allowed!
It helps to maintain a healthy atmosphere and break some ice on the way! Your slack forum or Github Issues don't need to be
always a sad place full of reported OOMs or race conditions! (: 

> As an example, I recently was amused by contributors from Russia that clearly where having some extra (%%%) help when

Reviewer: You may want to clarify the following paragraph. It's a funny bit, but hard to grasp.

* Write full sentences. 
* Avoid "this" "those" "that" words. 
* Try to explain as many details as you can. 
* Link to other communication as well.
* Install [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com/) web plugin.
* Look in Google translate if you are unsure about some wording.
* Avoid abbreviations and shortenings. For example, this sentence makes sense but it's probably unreadable for most of you: 
  
  ```
    "FTW should we introduce ASAP CRDs in PO if used on OCP by SWE from CS and GSoC? LMK"
  ```
   
* Avoid saying "never" or "always". See why here (:

All those relate to the project public communication (slack, forums, PRs) but also to documentation, flag descriptions, code comments, etc.

I agree that it is brutal and unfair, especially for non-native speakers like me. However, you have to learn some tiny
details of English to be more effective as the maintainer or, more effective as a contributor who might be maintainer someday.

## Review Issues and Code Carefully; Be Strict.

We are all busy. There are times when I am so tired and someone reports an issue that looks similar to a certain common issue.

> In same cases, my brain automatically assumes it's a duplicate. Only then I see that I did not read it carefully, and I was mistaken and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such cases, my brain automatically assumes it's a duplicate. Only then I see that I did not read it carefully, and I was mistaken and
```

the real reason was different.

So yes: Don't rush out too much, and **read things carefully**.

### When reviewing PR: As maintainers, we need to be extra careful.
 
Software these days can be complex. Go language improves readability enormously, I would even say it's the most simple
and readable programming language out there. However, still some software I work on ([Thanos](https://thanos.io))
is at the end a distributed system that involves concurrency, tricky optimizations like [mmaping](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/56a1fb6c084f11638f6f7b6532adc07dd05824b6/pkg/block/indexheader/binary_reader.go#L457)
and [bespoke binary formats](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/56a1fb6c084f11638f6f7b6532adc07dd05824b6/docs/components/store.md#format-version-1).

> This means that every detail might matter. And yes, we are guarded against mistakes with unit/integration/e2e tests, cross-building

Reviewer: don't use abbreviations  😜 

```suggestion
This means that every detail might matter. And yes, we are guarded against mistakes with unit/integration/end-to-end tests, cross-building
```

Author: yolo

### Rules for every PR I try to follow.

As the maintainer, please:

* Never approve the PR if you are not sure if it makes sense OR if you don't have enough time to review it properly.
It is totally fine to postpone a review or review only part of the PR and say that you can't review all right now.
**That's critical and please take it seriously**: Green is a green. PR is approved (green) if you would be ok to deploy this in production.
This is at least what we follow in the Thanos project.
* Don't trust anyone. Everyone does mistakes. Some more often, some less but still. Ask questions, challenge the code.
Anyone means also yourself! Review your own code. Trust me this works! If you change your mindset into reviewer's one and try to look through
your own diff before others, you can save some time for everyone ((:  
* Make use of [the boy scout rule](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/97-things-every/9780596809515/ch08.html), but carefully. Ask the author
to fix places around the areas they are contributing to unless it'a difficult or wide change.
* Follow the suggestions I had in previous sections: be friendly and use proper English.

> ### Literally refuse to review and merge huge (1k+) PRs.

Reviewer: Yes, abbreviation but this is a title 😬 

```suggestion
### Literally refuse to review and merge huge (1k+ LOC) PRs.
```

Reviewer: You can explain it in the paragraph.

 
Software these days can be complex. [Go language improves readability](https://talks.golang.org/2014/readability.slide) enormously.
However, still some software I work on ([Thanos](https://thanos.io) is at the end a distributed system that involves concurrency,
tricky optimizations like [mmaping](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/56a1fb6c084f11638f6f7b6532adc07dd05824b6/pkg/block/indexheader/binary_reader.go#L457)
and [bespoke binary formats](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/56a1fb6c084f11638f6f7b6532adc07dd05824b6/docs/components/store.md#format-version-1).

This means that every detail might matter. And yes, we are guarded against mistakes with unit/integration/e2e tests, cross-building
tests and [static analysis on each commit](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/25f5b0b9290fa1620647f00dd8df954380efc530/Makefile#L292),
but the coverage is always too low and it's easy to miss stuff.
 
And every mistake cost: sometimes just time, sometimes reputation, sometimes actual money when you (or any of users of your project)
have a major incident (e.g data loss, unavailability).

### It is really bad if the maintainer approves the PR with very visible mistakes.

> To me it means that they did not even scroll the proposed change until the end ): 

Author: :man_shrugging: :+1: :question: :-1: :stop_button: :100:

> To me it means that they did not even scroll the proposed change until the end ): 

Author: It's stronger than me.

### Don't go to extremes.
 
It's probably fine if some variable name is not perfect or if some comment is missing. Nothing will be perfect. 
It is even  sometimes fine to put a `// TODO(@author)` or GitHub Issue to fix it later. "Strict" also does not mean the PR has
be strictly along how you would implement it. Be open minded and happy for professional discussion. People think in different way
and as long it works, is readable and meet style guide. It does not mean you have to be always right! (: **Do your work with their hands,
find the balance.**

## Be Proactive and Intelligently Lazy.

There are certain rules that you can stick to if you want to be a more efficient maintainer and simply have more time to focus on what matters.

### Prefer asynchronous communication, but sync one as well. 

First of all, define the project's means of communication. Keeping GitHub issues for feature requests, bugs reports and feedback makes
sense. It is asynchronous, easily searchable and easy to follow. But these days it might be not enough. First of all,
potential users are sometimes too shy to put an issue with maybe basic questions due to e.g missing piece of the documentation.

> Setting some asynchronous channels like Slack (we use that in Thanos project) or IRC (Prometheus) is exactly for this purpose.

Author: Definitely! Sneaky linking that here (:

This allows building trust and relationship with community, contributors, and maintainers.

Additionally, if you want to resolve a problem, quickly discuss some matter or design, it is much better to schedule some discussion on slack,
than just slow comment by comment conversation on Github Issue or PR that takes weeks. With such, more direct communication
**users and contributors gain more trust in the project.** At some point you will find that community helps each other to answer questions and last but not
least: you can find new friends! (:     

### Repetitive work? Automate. 

You would be surprised at how innovative people are in order to *avoid work*. All those small repetitions can add up to [weeks of time](https://xkcd.com/1205/))
during your whole lifetime, so they matter. In Thanos project we try to apply it to everything:

* We were spending too much time during a review process to ensure proper commentaries. (Started with capital letters and finished with a period). We
were super strict about it. But sometimes instead of focusing on the essence of the PR I was spending time commenting wrong comments. That's why we created

> [this CI script](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/55cb8ca38b3539381dc6a781e637df15c694e50a/scripts/build-check-comments.sh#L85) that verifies this for us on the CI.

Author: :+1:

Similar with: [wrong whitespaces detection](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/25f5b0b9290fa1620647f00dd8df954380efc530/Makefile#L176),
[Copyright file headers detection](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/55cb8ca38b3539381dc6a781e637df15c694e50a/scripts/copyright/copyright.go#L23).
and [linting](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/25f5b0b9290fa1620647f00dd8df954380efc530/Makefile#L292) our code heavily.
**All of this to make sure maintainers do not have to!**
* We autogenerate our documentation from flags and [configuration](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/55cb8ca38b3539381dc6a781e637df15c694e50a/scripts/cfggen/main.go#L41).
This saves the effort of maintaining documentation, it is harder for it to get obsolete. We check if links work with amazing [liche tool.](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/25f5b0b9290fa1620647f00dd8df954380efc530/Makefile#L185)
* Every commit build our website hosted in the same repository and prepared preview thanks to [netlify.](https://www.netlify.com/)

> * Every time someone adds an object storage client we ensure it works as expected by running [e2e acceptance test.](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/55cb8ca38b3539381dc6a781e637df15c694e50a/pkg/objstore/objtesting/acceptance_e2e_test.go#L21).

Author: :man_facepalming:

* We wrote Go `testing` package extension that [allows to run benchmarks as tests](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/master/pkg/testutil/testorbench.go#L26) 

Does some repetition frustrate you? Handle this with automation! e.g [the recent frustration.](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/2102)

### Try to answer someones else question.. with a new section in your documentation!

This is easy to say, but not as easy to incorporate. However you will notice that if you follow this, it will either reduce

> the number of repeated questions or other contributors will be able to respond to each other in e.g slack room. 

Author: Thanks, will sed.

In fact, I wrote this blog post because someone asked for feedback on how he can become a maintainer! (: 

Of course, it escalated a bit...

### Do you want users to give feedback? Make the project accessible.

Having extensive documentation is the key. But there are more ways to encourage your users to grab latest without fear and

> deploy your code early! One way of doing it, is [building docker image on each merge to master](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/master/.circleci/config.yml#L59)) (e.g with tag `master-<date>-<sha>`)

Author: Thanks for this feedback! If such service exists, yea, I believe it make sense to use it here. We use those master images a lot, so they are useful for sure.

> deploy your code early! One way of doing it, is [building docker image on each merge to master](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/master/.circleci/config.yml#L59)) (e.g with tag `master-<date>-<sha>`)

Reviewer 3: I had this one in mind: https://ctr.run/

> deploy your code early! One way of doing it, is [building docker image on each merge to master](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/master/.circleci/config.yml#L59)) (e.g with tag `master-<date>-<sha>`)

Author: Nice. Not a fan of requiring users to have some extra tool that is not popular yet. But as an idea alone - it would be nice to make it popular!

### Admit your mistakes and fix them.

> We all makes mistakes. Maintainers do them as well e.g with project's design decision. Always be open for improvements, even if it means

Author: Thanks, did not know! sedding.

If you want to just become maintainer of some project you contribute to, by following those pieces of advices you might increase
your chances. Chances that someone will trust you to do solid project maintenance. Or let me put me it this way: 
*if you do the opposite, most likely, no one will want you as the maintainer.* (:

### I am far from being perfect, but I try to follow those rules. 

My first [open source contribution was 2015 to Apache Mesos](https://github.com/apache/mesos/commits?author=bwplotka).
Since then I fell in love in open source work and started to learn the things I am sharing in this post by *observing*
examples of good maintainers behaviour, as well as seeing some anti-patterns. 
On top of this I learned a lot by practice while co-maintaining [Thanos](https://thanos.io), [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io) and other projects.

**Don't get me wrong: I am personally far from being perfect, but I try to improve every day.** Last but not least the following practices are
purely related to **soft skills**. I won't touch in this post how you should design your system or write your code. **If you did not already notice,

> probably most of your work as the maintainer will be communication with the people.**

Author: What about.. "with humans" (:

> probably most of your work as the maintainer will be communication with the people.**

Reviewer 4: I think just removing "the" is fine :)

**Important: Never compromise the quality of the project just to be `friendly`!**

### Always say "thank you".

Show friendliness and gratefulness for all the contributions, even for the code that was not eventually merged. Still,
contributor spent time and effort. Probably they learned on the way, so nothing is a total waste!

### Try to be nice if you are suggesting changes on a PR. 

This is maybe obvious, but when you review dozens PRs a day, you can lose patience. Still, always try to explain the reasoning, especially if someone is new to the community.

For example instead of saying: 

```
"Lol, that's wrong, it should be ThisNiceName() not ThatWrongName()"
```

Maybe you could say:
 
```
"This is great overall, thanks! But I think we can still improve the name of this method.
The reason is that [consistency, more verbose, less complex, style guide linked here, etc]"
```

It's really worth it! Contributors will love to contribute because they are learning, and they feel more supported.

### Be fair and clear; use direct communication.

> You can't escape from awkward situations. Sometimes you can have two contributors yelling each other in the PR that someone

Author: That is what I meant indeed (: `Awkward situations are unavoidable`

the communication. It makes the person you write to (in e.g. issue):

* In the best case: Waste their time trying to understand exactly what you mean, asking follow-up questions, etc.
* Worse: They will just ignore your message, not respond at all.
* The worst: They will do opposite action to what you just recommend, waste even more time, and get frustrated.

### It saves time. 

It's quite funny but to save time overall you have to sometimes spend a bit time in the first place. For example, on your messaging:

* Write full sentences. 
* Avoid "this" "those" "that" words. 
* Try to explain as many details as you can. 
* Link to other communication.
* Install [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com/) web plugin.
* Look in Google translate if you are unsure about some wording.
* Avoid abbreviations and shortenings. For example, this sentence makes sense but it's probably unreadable for most of you: 
  
  ```
    "FTW should we introduce ASAP CRDs in PO if used on OCP by SWE from CS and GSoC? LMK"
  ```
   
* Avoid saying ["never" or "always"](https://twitter.com/pracucci/status/1221397473555550209).

> All those relate to the project public communication (Slack, forums, PRs) but also to documentation, flag descriptions, code comments, etc.

Author: hahha,. true (:

> All those relate to the project public communication (Slack, forums, PRs) but also to documentation, flag descriptions, code comments, etc.

Author: I also said, I "try" to follow those!

I agree that it is brutal and unfair, especially for non-native speakers like me. However, you have to learn some tiny
details of English to be more effective as the maintainer or, more effective as a contributor who might be maintainer someday.

## Review Issues and Code Carefully; Be Strict.

We are all busy. However, don't rush out too much, and **read things carefully**.

### When reviewing a PR: As maintainers, we need to be extra careful.
 

> Software these days can be complex. [Go language improves readability](https://talks.golang.org/2014/readability.slide) enormously.

Author: Fair point (: You CAN still write unreadable code with Go inded

but the coverage is always too low and it's easy to miss stuff.
 
And every mistake has a cost: sometimes just time, sometimes reputation, sometimes actual money when you (or any of users of your project)
have a major incident e.g. data loss, unavailability.

### It is really bad if the maintainer approves the PR with very visible mistakes.

To me it means that they did not even scroll the proposed change until the end ): 
There might be different reasons behind such a mistake. Maybe the maintainer was too tired or simply did not see that
bug. Maybe they wanted to be nice and not block contributions? Maybe the author did amazing PRs before so maintainer trusted the
author? Unfortunately, there can be sometimes even more selfish reasoning: 
They approved just to show they are active, even though they don't have time to maintain the project full time. Don't be
like this. It is pretty obvious!

### As the external contributor you can also review pull requests!

In fact e.g. according to our review process policy, a contributor's code review, if done by the contributor whom we trust and

> they knows a codebase, can be enough to merge some less impactful PRs. I think this is great because it allows a contributor

Author: Yes, sound much much better

to do reviews in a safe environment, with other maintainers to guide them and step in if some comment is not particularly
correct. It's also a very good sign that the contributor is ready to become the maintainer!

### Rules for every PR I try to follow.

As the maintainer, please:

* Never approve the PR if you are not sure if it makes sense OR if you don't have enough time to review it properly.
It is totally fine to postpone or review only part of the PR and say that you can't review all right now.
**That's critical and please take it seriously**: Green is a green. PR is approved (green) if you would be ok to deploy this in production.
This is at least what we follow in the Thanos project.
* Don't trust anyone. Everyone does mistakes. Ask questions, challenge the code. Anyone means also yourself! Review your own code.
* Make use of [the boy scout rule](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/97-things-every/9780596809515/ch08.html), but carefully. Ask the author

> to fix places around the areas they are contributing to unless it's a difficult or wide change.

Author: Yes, I fully agree. Also it make the PR harder to review and not focused on the main goal. 

> And I would be mildly irritated if the reviewer asked me to fix unrelated stuff in their codebase.

I did this all the time. Ask any users to fix stuff around =D

> to fix places around the areas they are contributing to unless it's a difficult or wide change.

Author: I can totally see this being controversial.

> to fix places around the areas they are contributing to unless it's a difficult or wide change.

Reviewer 4: My opinion is:
- I would not ask to fix unrelated things
- If a contributor applies that rule they are welcome to do so
- If it is directly linked to the code in question: e.g. some refactoring would be needed of the code being changed.. I could ask (if you add a 10th parameter of a function .. I could ask it to be changed to a struct if it makes it better)

* Follow the suggestions I had in previous sections: be friendly and use proper English.

### Literally refuse to review and merge huge (1k+ lines of code) PRs.

Only a few are capable to review such an amount of code in detail. Additionally, it's really difficult to find 3h of the

> continuous focus to review that properly. It all ends with delayed reviews, merging not fully reviewed code and increasing chances of

Author: Remember: I said I am not perfect =D

unnecessary complexity or bugs. Avoid big PRs by splitting and chaining smaller ones or maintain functional commits. That latter

> is quite harder to maintain and not obvious.

Author: I disagree. It does not matter how you merge this. What matters is review process. Who cares how it looks after the merge? You rarely review after the merge. And if you do you can get back to the old PR.

> is quite harder to maintain and not obvious.

Author: ..at least if you are using GitHub flow

> is quite harder to maintain and not obvious.

Reviewer 5: I cannot really explain that here in the comment. And if you haven't already converted to the "church of git", I should not convert you just for this blog post. You will see the light eventually… (o:

In the meantime, if you see me silently weeping in the corner when somebody has squashed my commits when merging my PR, or because I have to cherry-pick a bug fix from master into the release branch, just give me a hug, even if you don't understand my misery yet.

> is quite harder to maintain and not obvious.

Author: I will remember!

because you can always improve it later and you can move quickly. MVP is done in no time, the demo is ready. But then what?
Who will refactor the code? Who will make it consistent? Who will "productionise" it? And when? The answer is: **Probably no one, never** (:

That's why I am more in favor of the other group of people: Those who aim for **quality** vs short term velocity. **Design
first** vs quick MVP. We do that while maintaining both Thanos and Prometheus projects. I strongly believe that is the
best practice for long term projects like that. (: 

Remember: Some contributors will not like you because you are strict on details and refuse to add the feature they
implemented. **But more people will hate you if the project will be causing incidents, because of [YOLO code](https://jaxenter.com/yolo-driven-development-methodology-113469.html),
unnecessary complexity or unmaintainable features. (:**

### Don't go to extremes.
 
It's probably fine if some variable name is not perfect or if some comment is missing. Nothing will be perfect. 
It is even  sometimes fine to put a `// TODO(@author)` or GitHub Issue to fix it later. "Strict" also does not mean the PR has

> be strictly along how you would implement it. Be open minded and happy for professional discussion. People think in different way

Author: :+1:

> and as long it works, is readable and meet style guide. It does not mean you have to be always right! (: **Do your work with their hands,

Author: ;p

> and as long it works, is readable and meet style guide. It does not mean you have to be always right! (: **Do your work with their hands,

Author: let's skip it then.

### Prefer asynchronous communication, but use synchronous as well.

First of all, define the project's means of communication. Keeping GitHub issues for feature requests, bugs reports and feedback makes
sense. It is asynchronous, easily searchable and easy to follow. But these days it might be not enough. First of all,
potential users are sometimes too shy to put an issue with maybe basic questions due to e.g. missing piece of the documentation.
Setting some asynchronous channels like Slack (we use that in Thanos project) or [IRC](https://xkcd.com/1782/) (Prometheus) is exactly for this purpose.
This allows building trust and relationship with community, contributors, and maintainers.

Additionally, if you want to resolve a problem, quickly discuss some matter or design, it is much better to schedule some discussion on Slack,
than just slow comment by comment conversation on GitHub issue or PR that takes weeks. With such more direct communication
**users and contributors gain more trust in the project.** At some point you will find that community helps each other to answer questions and last but not

> least: you can find new friends! (:     

Author: Well, I assume that you understand that async is preferred (as the section title). What I want to say is that sync one matters as well. Still async should be preferred  I agree.

and [linting](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/25f5b0b9290fa1620647f00dd8df954380efc530/Makefile#L292) our code heavily.
**All of this to make sure maintainers do not have to!**
* We autogenerate our documentation from flags and [configuration](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/55cb8ca38b3539381dc6a781e637df15c694e50a/scripts/cfggen/main.go#L41).
This saves the effort of maintaining documentation, it is harder for it to get obsolete. We check if links work with amazing [liche tool.](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/25f5b0b9290fa1620647f00dd8df954380efc530/Makefile#L185)
* Every commit build our website hosted in the same repository and prepared preview thanks to [netlify.](https://www.netlify.com/)
* Every time someone adds an object storage client we ensure it works as expected by running [e2e acceptance test.](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/55cb8ca38b3539381dc6a781e637df15c694e50a/pkg/objstore/objtesting/acceptance_e2e_test.go#L21)
* We wrote Go `testing` package extension that [allows to run benchmarks as tests](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/master/pkg/testutil/testorbench.go#L26).

> * leaktest

Author: Yes, yes, was in progress. Now fixed (:

### Do you want users to give feedback? Make the project accessible.

Having extensive documentation is the key. But there are more ways to encourage your users to grab the latest build without fear and
deploy your code early! One way of doing it, is [building docker image on each merge to master](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/master/.circleci/config.yml#L59)
(e.g. with tag `master-<date>-<sha>`).

### Admit your mistakes and fix them.

We all makes mistakes. Maintainers do them as well e.g. with project's design decision. Always be open for improvements, even if it means
saying sorry, and **removing a powerful feature** that is causing problems and confusion. For example [we had to remove gossip
functionality to simplify Thanos](https://thanos.io/proposals/201809_gossip-removal.md/) 

Another example or our initial mistake was pushing our docker images as `latest`. [**Never use or push `latest` tag**](https://vsupalov.com/docker-latest-tag/). Period.
It's confusing and magic. Avoid magic.

Overall, be open for changes, even though it means to admit that you were wrong. That is fine, because now you might know more!

## Want more help? Give back, help others.

> There is an old Chinese saying: `The rose's in her hand,the flavor in mine` (I learned this thanks to a Chinese contributor ♥️).

Reviewer 5: Missing blank after comma. And perhaps her → their? Following your advice of gender-neutral language…

> This is again, in my opinion very important and maybe surprising truth: **How to build community? By helping the community out!**

Reviewer 5: This is again, in my opinion, a very important...

You can't be selfish. You created and maintain the open source project in the first place, so you are already helping out the people.

> But at some point you feel stressed, exhausted, alone or helpless. This is where the community helps enormously. You want more users, because (tiny)

Reviewer 5: because a (tiny)

percentage of those users actually will give back and help out. Some of them will become maintainers next to you **or even friends.**

So how to achieve that? Just ask around, say that you need help? Well not really...

> ### Contribute; Reuse.

Reviewer 5: Either "Contribute; reuse." or "Contribute. Reuse."

> The answer is easy: help others. Instead of building a project from the scratch out of nowhere **build it on the shoulders of giants**.

Reviewer 5: Instead of building a project from scratch out of nowhere, **build it on the shoulders of giants**.

> First of all, make sure someone needs it except you. Thanks to extending project, you already have data what is a main painpoint.

Reviewer 5: Thanks to extending another project, you already have data about the main pain points.

> Secondly, you have helpful community to start with. Thirdly, you can (and you probably should) reuse some pieces of the code from your "mother" project.

Reviewer 5: have a helpful community

> Reuse have many potential advantages:

Reviewer 5: Reuse has many...

* You [LEARN!](https://twitter.com/bwplotka/status/1216693249055887360)

> * You immediately hook into the ecosystem (e.g. by sharing API). This means you can reuse same integrations and tools!

Reviewer 5: ...by sharing an API...
...reuse the same integrations...

> * Multiple parties are maintaining certain components. The piece of code has more users, thus is more tested and mature. Your project is then safer as a result.

Reviewer 5: A reused piece of code has more users

* You help multiple projects, so you will get help from them if needed! (e.g. review something on your project, help with design questions, etc.)

> This is what I and [Fabian](https://github.com/fabxc) did with [Thanos](https://thanos.io/) project: we reused exactly

Reviewer 5: with the Thanos project

> the same storage format as Prometheus, as well as many other components that we directly import from Prometheus codebase.

Reviewer 5: from the Prometheus codebase

> At some point, because I was maintaining those dependencies as they were critical to the Thanos project, I became the

Reviewer 5: I became a

maintainer of Prometheus itself (: In the end, I am helping with much more than just parts that
Thanos relates to. I give out more because, in my opinion, kindness always returns in double!

> ### Mentor; Enable others.

Reviewer 5: As above: After semicolon, don't capitalize.

> Every one needs experienced, motivated and highly skilled people to work with. People don't get born like this.

Reviewer 5: Everyone

> In open source you meet a variety of contributors. Sometimes it will be crazy-ass ex-Googler, ex-Uber who wants to help and

Reviewer 5: Personally, I wouldn't reinforce the stereotype that ex-Googlers etc. are per se "better".
Also, note that "crazy" is a problematic term (using a mental-health metaphor, and then with a word that is derogatory in that area). How about "badass"?

Author: badass will do... ;p

Author: and Googler is still stereotype ..

gives you some amazing ideas, but sometimes, you will work with people who just started their journey with programming or infrastructure (in our case). 

> There will be moments where you would do a change 10x times faster than getting back-and-forth on the same PR with the newbie. You 

Reviewer 5: "10 times" or "ten times" or "10x" (but not the redundant "10x times")

Author: :man_facepalming:

> will get angry that you are gaining almost nothing and instead you are free mentor; Git, Linux, Bash, English teacher or Security, Kubernetes guide.

Reviewer 5: are a free mentor; a Git, Linux, Bash, English teacher or a Security, Kubernetes guide.

**But don't be frustrated, because you actually gain something: Potentially skilled contributor, a happy human that is very likely to start

> amazing contributions and becames another maintainer someday!**

Reviewer 5: and to become

> So.. be patient and enable others if you can. Additionally, be proactive here as well and participate in programs like [CommunityBridge](https://communitybridge.org/)

Reviewer 5: So... (three dots – or if you want to be typographically correct, use an ellipsis character here and elsewhere: … (which is different from ...)

or [Google Summer of Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/). Those allow students to quickly ramp up into your

> project (and get paid on the way). This is especially amazing as it allows minorities to be mentored and helped by maintainers

Reviewer 5: minorities → underrepresented groups (there are more women in the world than men, and more Indians than Europeans, they are hardly minorities)

Author: true!

and maybe someday improve the diversity of your project's team or at your work.

### State project expectations from the beginning.

> One way to avoid later frustration stress or just fuss is to make sure the project has explicitly stated the goals.

Reviewer 5: stated its goals.

Tell users what to expect from the project. E.g. Prometheus and Thanos are not designed to handle events. That's why it will be
never optimized for high cardinality data.

Is something not done yet, is it in the experimental stage, or is it not tested properly? **Explicitly** mention it.
You don't want some huge customer to report that they lost millions because something in your project lost data. Obviously, it's their
legal responsibility – it's an open source project after all. But you want to make sure that users know what are the best practices and where
to be very careful.

> ### Consider donating your project to trusted Open Source organization.

Reviewer 5: to a trusted

This has many benefits. The most important one is that you are not alone, but also (in theory) the project is independent. 
At some point when the project will be big enough (think: Prometheus), there will be many parties that want to influence it, because there is money there.

> Organizations like [Apache.org](https://www.apache.org/), [Linux Foundation](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/) and [Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)](https://www.cncf.io/)

Reviewer 5: the Linux Foundation or the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)

help to maintain independence in terms of decision making. They help with operational functions like swag, organizing conferences and meetups,
3rd party paid resources (e.g. cloud resources for testing), security audits and more.

### Stay organized

> One way to get more productive is to start from your own personal organization skills. For that I really recommend the book 

Reviewer 5: organizational

[Getting Things Done by David Allen](https://www.audible.co.uk/pd/Getting-Things-Done-Audiobook/B01B6WT3JY).
 
Spoiler alert! Focus on clearing your mind. If you have quick <3min task, just do it. For longer one try to note what's the next step

> and save it in some trusted place (Google Keep, notebook). Visit this place everyday morning. This will allow your mind to relax,

Reviewer 5: every morning

be innovative and focused on what is now!

## Stay Healthy; Have Fun!

This is the last one but also the most important rule you will read here. **Don't overwork.** If you are tired or maintaining

> does not make you happy anymore, then first try to rest (no computer allowed!), then just quit and find another thing to focus on.

Reviewer 5: But please leave the project gracefully, tell people about it, do a clean handover, rather than just disappear, or even worth: pretend to still be a maintainer (to keep that badge of honor) but not really doing anything anymore.

Author: Very very fair - will add.

> **Open source is the opportunity to find best friends, have lots of fun and amazing job, however, it is also the place of endless requests, bug reports, and questions.**

Reviewer 5: is an opportunity … and an amazing job. However, it is also a place of endless...

> * There will be users which want help NOW, HERE because something they misconfigured is on fire.

Reviewer 5: There will be users that want

> * There will be people from different cultures, spamming you directly on email about their requests.

Reviewer 5: via email

> * There will be hard decision to make and all of them might be somehow wrong (that's called trade-off...)

Reviewer 5: decisions

> And on top of that, you might be just a part-time maintainer like most of us are. Everyone has a job on top of it with less or more

Reviewer 5: less or more → more or less

time dedicated to open source. For example at [Red Hat](https://redhat.com/) we design, develop and we are even on-call for our internal monitoring platform, where

> we use some of the products we maintain. Moreover, probably no one knows about that. Everyone thinks it's your only focus and blame you of slow project movement... 

Reviewer 5: blame you for slow

Which comes to another point: 

> ### Don't be afraid to make mistakes; No one actually blames you personally!

Reviewer 5: Don't capitalize after semicolon.

> Naturally, your imagination will trick you that if someone puts and bug report or comments about your code it will definitely mean

Reviewer 5: if someone files a bug report

they *hate you* and *your work*. Everyone has some insecurities, so it's totally fine to have such an impression.

> **What helps? Growing the healthy maintainer's team.** Trust other contributors and give them a chance. What you win is feeling of shared

Reviewer 5: Growing a healthy maintainers team

responsibility.

> Additionally, it helps if you would **assume by default that everyone is positive and professional**. 99% people I met so far in tech open source world

Reviewer 5: in the tech open source world
(or just "in the open source world" – is there a non-tech open source world that would be different?)

are nice, friendly and positive. They will not blame you for mistakes, unless
you do something malicious on purpose. Everyone makes mistakes so it's normal. So don't be shy and allow yourself to be more open! 

There is one way of learning this: **making mistakes**. What do you think: How many times did I say something on the internet that was stupid?
How many typos I did? How many English grammar mistakes? `Millions of them`.

> One time I said on public, recorded Prometheus Community Meeting that "I am Prometheus maintainer and I became just recently a Thanos maintainer"

Reviewer 5: on a public

and the truth was the opposite. While I felt super shitty and embarrassed about this, my whole team was laughing. When I look at it now... it did not matter (:

> I think it's a trade-off again and I can trade my *external perfect image of perfect person* (which you will maintain only by doing nothing)

Reviewer 5: of a perfect person

**for extremely meaningful conversations, things I learned on the way, relations I gained, public speaking that made the community more diverse and bigger, etc.**
In open source, you probably should say `goodbye` to your perfect "external no-mistake image".

> If you don't accept this, you might not be happy in maintaining the public project. It might be simply unhealthy, so keep that in mind.

Reviewer 5: a public project

> ### Open Source Project Maintenance is not a sprint, it is a marathon.

Reviewer 5: I would capitalize as "Open source project maintenance is not a sprint, it is a marathon."

> This is what I heard once from one friend when I was overworking, and it is very true. Short periods of extreme programming, deciding about the project,

Reviewer 5: from a friend (unless you want to emphasize that of all the many friends you have, only a single one said that).

Author: I am fine with less friends but high quality ones =D

after-hours issue triaging and working during the weekend might look fine... but you won't be able to sustain that for a long time.

Set boundaries and maintain a healthy work life balance. You don't have to respond to issues immediately. Allow others to
investigate issue first for learning purposes, and only guide them through. Always take time for a high quality rest.
A rested and clear mind will solve problems 100x faster. Don't sacrifice weekends, sleep 8 hours, do sports.

**Depression and burnout is pretty serious stuff. At the moment of writing, I'm 27 years old and I already burnt out twice in my
career.** I definitely don't recommend this! Just because of too high expectations towards myself, overworking, ambitions, etc.

### Have fun!

> Open Source is fun place. If you spend some of your work or free time at forums, GitHub Issues and working with the community, it's

Reviewer 5: is a fun place
Issues → issues

> always worth to fill this place with positive energy! Laugh, jokes, funny situations, memes, emojis. Everything is allowed!

Reviewer 5: Unless they are offensive, as you said above. (o:

Author: ![](https://media0.giphy.com/media/7xIilGLiZAna8/giphy.gif)

It helps to maintain a healthy atmosphere and break some ice on the way! Your Slack forum or GitHub issues don't need to be
always just a sad place full of reported OOMs or race conditions! (: 

As an example, I was recently amused by contributors from Russia that clearly where having some extra *%%%* help while
making [this PR](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/pull/1789#issuecomment-559025685). I have met them at the [FOSDEM](https://fosdem.org/)
the other day and they are nice people in real life as well. (: 

## Summary 

This guide is something I am aiming for when interacting with the community and maintaining open source projects.

> I definitely failed many times to follow these rules, especially around staying healthy part (: But I feel like these items

Reviewer 5: around the staying-healthy part

> can guide you to achieve happiness and improve open source world! We can sum these rules into 3 main points:

Reviewer 5: improve the open source world

### Treat others like you would like to be treated.

Be friendly, because you would like for someone to be friendly to you. Don't sell your project in everyone's users' faces,
as you also would not like to be spammed on your own project's forum. **Help others, teach them how to program, use Linux, Git or
make presentations as you probably also had help in the past.**

> ### Do you want to become maintainer? Behave like maintainer!

Reviewer 5: Do you want to become a maintainer? Behave like a maintainer!

> Literally, almost everything maintainer do, you can do. You can respond to Slack questions and GitHub Issues.

Reviewer 5: maintainer → maintainers
Issues → issues

> You can review the code. You can guide other users and contributors. You can tweet, speak at conferences about the project.

Reviewer 5: the code → code

> Try to mimic the good patterns from other maintainers and do the hard work. **You don't need a write permission to make decision

Reviewer 5: You don't need write permissions to make decisions and act like a maintainer of the project.

and act like maintainer of the project.**

> ### Be innovative; Challenge processes; Optimize! 

Reviewer 5: Don't capitalize after semicolons.

Always question processes. Are they good enough? Can this repetitive task be automated? We had many innovative ideas

> just because we were frustrated that we waste time. **Try to optimize for quality and time saving.** This will give you more time for pleasures (:

Reviewer 5: pleasure

### Last message...

> Starting a new project and becoming a maintainer will not guarantee you the community from day 1. It is a very long journey and hard work.

Reviewer 5: guarantee you a community

Usually not a work of a single person. What I would suggest is to join another project first. Grow and learn. Choose your passion and go!

> Check `good first item`, or `help wanted` labels for GitHub Issues, join community calls, Slack channels.

Reviewer 5: Issues → issues

And... that's it! I hope you will find all of this helpful.

**And I wish you a pleasant project maintenance ♥️.**

> PS: *It's my first non-coding, non-system design blog post so... please give me feedback! If you don't agree with something or I missed important detail, let me know! (:* 

Reviewer 5: "an important detail", or "important details".

### Admit your mistakes and fix them.

We all makes mistakes. Maintainers do them as well e.g with project's design decision. Always be open for improvements, even if it means
saying sorry, and **removing a powerful feature** that is causing problems e.g confusion. For example [we had to remove gossip
functionality to simplify Thanos](https://thanos.io/proposals/201809_gossip-removal.md/) 

Another example or our initial mistake was pushing our docker images as `latest`. [**Never use or push `latest` tag**](https://vsupalov.com/docker-latest-tag/). Period.
It's confusing and magic. Avoid magic.

Overall, be open for changes, even though it means to admit that you were wrong. That is fine, because now you might know more!

## Want more help? Give back, help others.

There is an old Chinese saying: `The rose's in her hand,the flavor in mine` (I learnt this thanks to Chinese Thanos contributor ♥️).
This is again, in my opinion very important and maybe surprising truth: **How to build community? By helping the community out!**

> You can't be selfish. First of all, you created / maintain the project in the open source in the first place, so you are already helping out the people.

Author: Yea, too many "firsts"

Reuse ensures that: 

* You [LEARN!](https://twitter.com/bwplotka/status/1216693249055887360)
* You immediately hook into the ecosystem (e.g by sharing API).
* Multiple parties are maintaining certain components. The piece of code has more users, thus is more tested and mature. Your project is then safer as a result.
* You help multiple projects, so you will get help from them if needed! (e.g review something on your project, help with design questions, etc)

This is what we did with [Fabian](https://github.com/fabxc) with [Thanos](http://thanos.io/) project. We reused exactly
the same storage format as Prometheus, as well as many other components that we directly import from Prometheus codebase.
At some point, because I was maintaining those dependencies as they were critical to the Thanos project, I became the
maintainer of Prometheus itself (: And at the end, I am helping with much more than just parts that
Thanos relates to. I give out more because, in my opinion, kindness always returns in double!

As a result of reusing some code, API and storage format we are super easy to work with. This makes it convenient

> for Prometheus community to jump in and start using Thanos. Especially when they can install all gradually and the same integrations and tools

Author: This part feels like selling. Removing the whole thing. That's not the point of this blog post to promote Thanos.

amazing contributions and became another maintainer someday!** 

So.. be patient and enable others if you can. Additionally, be proactive here as well and participate in programs like [CommunityBridge](https://communitybridge.org/)
or [Google Summer of Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/). Those allow students to quickly ramp up into your
project (and get paid on the way). This is especially amazing as it allows minorities to be mentored and helped by maintainers
and maybe someday improve the diversity of your project's team or at your work.

### State project expectations from the beginning.

One way to avoid later frustration stress or just fuss is to make sure the project has explicitly stated the goals.
Tell users what to expect from the project. E.g Prometheus and Thanos are not designed to handle events. That's why it will be
never optimized for high cardinality data.

Something is not yet done, is in the experimental stage, you did not test that properly? **Explicitly** mention it. 
You don't want some huge customer to report that they lost millions because something in your project lost data etc. Obviously, it's their

> legal responsibility - it's an open source project after all. But you want to make sure users know what are the best practises and where

Author: hmmmmmm I literally does not have it on my keyboard XD I will just copy the char you call `en-dash` ((: Good to know!

> legal responsibility - it's an open source project after all. But you want to make sure users know what are the best practises and where

Reviewer 3: If you use Mac, you can get it by option+- (for en-dash) option+shift+- for em-dash. Typically em-dash is for sub-ideas in the sentence and en-dash for ranges, but... just not using hyphen is good enough :)

https://glog.glennf.com/blog/2017/7/6/dash-dash-it-all if you want to be geeky about it :)

to be very careful.

### Consider donating your project to trusted Open Source organization.

This has many benefits. The most important one is that you are not alone, but also (in theory) the project is independent. 
At some point when the project will be big enough (think: Prometheus), there will be many parties that want to influence it, because there is money there.

Organizations like [Apache.org](https://www.apache.org/), [Linux Foundation](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/) and [Cloud NativeComputing Foundation (CNCF)](https://www.cncf.io/)

> help to maintain independence in terms of decision making. They help with operational functions like SWAG, organizing conferences and meetups,

Author: I just felt it's important.

XD

If you don't accept this you won't have fun in maintaining the public project, it will be simply unhealthy, so keep that in mind.

### Open Source Project Maintenance is not a sprint, it is a marathon.

This is what I heard from one friend when I was overworking and it is very true. Short periods of extreme programming, deciding about the project,
after-hours issue triaging and working during the weekend might look fine... but you won't be able to sustain that for a long time.

Set boundaries and maintain a healthy work life balance. You don't have to respond to issues immediately. Allow others to
investigate issue first for learning purposes, and only guide them through. Always take time for a high quality rest.
A rested and clear mind will solve problems 100x quicker. Don't sacrifice weekends, sleep 8 hours, do sports.

**Depression and burnout are pretty serious stuff. At the moment of writing, I'm 27 years old and I already burnt out twice in my
career.** I definitely don't recommend this! All of this because of my too high expectations towards myself, overworking, ambitions, etc.   

### Have fun!

> Open Source is fun place. If you spent some of your work or free time at forums, GitHub Issues and working with the community, it's

Author: yup :+1:

---
authors:
- name: "Bartek Płotka"
date: 2020-02-10
linktitle: "How to Become an Amazing OSS Project Maintainer, Survive, And Have Fun on The Way!"
type:
- post 
- posts
title: "How to Become an Amazing OSS Project Maintainer, Survive, And Have Fun on The Way!"
weight: 1
categories:
- open-source
---

> In this post, I would like to share what, in my honest opinion, a **"perfect"** maintainer of the open source software should do.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this post, I would like to share what, in my honest opinion, a **"perfect"** maintainer of an open source software should do.
```

This is maybe obvious, but when you review dozens of PRs a day, you can lose patience. Still, always try to explain the reasoning, especially if someone is new to the community.
For example instead of saying: 

```
"Lol, that's wrong, it should be ThisNiceName() not ThatWrongName()"
```

Maybe you could say:
 
```
"This is great overall, thanks! But I think we can still improve the name of this method.
The reason is that [consistency, more verbose, less complex, style guide linked here, etc]"
```

It's really worth it! Contributors will love to contribute because they are **learning**, and they feel more supported.

### Be fair and clear. Use direct communication.

Awkward situations are unavoidable. Sometimes you can have two contributors yelling at each other in the PR that someone
has the right to implement a certain feature. Another time you want to quickly fix the issue, while there is already
a PR by some contributor, waiting for a rebase. Or maybe you have a contributor who tries to "triage" issues by just
commenting on every issue `ping @bwplotka` several times (like I am not getting notifications in inbox already...).

> **Try to consider other people's feelings.** What helps in **ALL** of those cases is to **ask the contributor to join Slack

Reviewer 4: Slack or another channel :)

trusted contributor that knows the codebase can be enough to merge the PR. I think this is great because it allows a contributor
to do reviews in a safe environment, with other maintainers to guide them and step in if some comment is not particularly
correct. It's also a very good sign that the contributor is ready to become the maintainer!

### Rules for every PR I try to follow.

As the maintainer, please:

* Never approve the PR if you are not sure if it makes sense OR if you don't have enough time to review it properly.
It is totally fine to postpone or review only a part of the PR and say that you can't review everything right now.
**That's critical and please take it seriously**: green is green. Only approve a PR if you would be ok to deploy it to production.
This is at least what we follow in the Thanos project.
* Don't trust anyone. Everyone makes mistakes. Ask questions, challenge the code. Anyone means also yourself! Don't merge 
your own PR without review. (:
* Make use of [the scout rule](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/97-things-every/9780596809515/ch08.html), but very carefully. Ask the author

> to fix places around the areas they are contributing to unless he is totally new, it's a difficult or invasive change.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
to fix places around the areas they are contributing to unless they is totally new, it's a difficult or invasive change.
```

* Every commit triggers a build of website hosted in the same repository and results in handy preview thanks to [netlify.](https://www.netlify.com/)
* We wrote Go `testing` package extension that [allows to run benchmarks as tests](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/master/pkg/testutil/testorbench.go#L26).
* We use [leaktest](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/56a1fb6c084f11638f6f7b6532adc07dd05824b6/pkg/query/api/v1_test.go#L51) to make sure we don't leak go routines.

Does some repetition frustrate you? Handle it with automation! Here is one such [recent frustration.](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/2102)

### Try to answer someone else's question... with a new section in your documentation!

This is easy to say, but not as easy to incorporate. However, you will notice that if you follow this, it will either reduce
the number of repeated questions or other contributors will be able to respond to each other in e.g. Slack channel.

> In fact, I wrote this blog post because someone asked for feedback on how he can become a maintainer! (: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In fact, I wrote this blog post because someone asked for feedback on how they can become a maintainer! (: 
```

Author: Nicely spotted!

continuous focus to review that properly. It all ends with delayed reviews, merging not fully reviewed code and increasing chances of
unnecessary complexity or bugs. **Avoid big PRs by splitting them and chaining into smaller PRs**. Alternative is to maintain functional commits,
but it tends to be harder and non-obvious to work with for both author and reviewer. 

One exception: replace-like (e.g. `sed`, `go mod vendor`, `goimports`) changes across many packages, as long as the author
also presents the script/command that was used to perform rename. **Just make sure you don't mix changes made by the script with manual ones!**

### Strict vs Fast.

In my opinion, there are two types of maintainers. In one group, maintainers are more happy to merge maybe not yet ready code,
because you can always improve it later and you can move quickly. MVP is done in no time, the demo is ready. But then what?
Who will refactor the code? Who will make it consistent? Who will "productionise" it? And when? The answer is: **Probably no one, never** (:

That's why I am more in favor of the other group of people: Those who aim for **quality** vs short term velocity. **Design

> first** vs quick MVP. We aim for second group while maintaining both Thanos and Prometheus projects. I strongly believe that is the

Reviewer 6: We aim for first group right? Not the second one?

Author: xD

Set boundaries and maintain a healthy work-life balance. You don't have to respond to issues immediately. Allow others to
investigate issue first for learning purposes, and only guide them through. Always take time for a high-quality rest.
A rested and a clear mind will solve problems 100x faster. Don't sacrifice weekends, sleep 8 hours, do sports.

**Depression and burnout is pretty serious stuff. At the moment of writing, I'm 27 years old and I already burnt out twice in my
career.** I definitely don't recommend this! I burnt-out because of too high expectations towards myself, overworking, ambitions, etc.

### Have fun!

Open Source is a fun place. If you spend some of your work or free time at forums, GitHub Issues and working with the community, **it's
always worth to fill this place with positive energy!** Laugh, jokes, funny situations, memes, emojis. Everything is allowed!
It helps to maintain a healthy atmosphere and break some ice on the way! Your Slack forum or GitHub issues don't need to be
always just a sad place full of reported OOMs or race conditions! (: 

> As an example, I was recently amused by contributors from Russia that clearly where having some extra *%%%* help while

Reviewer 6: %%%%?

Author: :champagne:
